Hello everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always, Ricardo Loops
. And today I'm joined by Doctor Jean Manuel Rubin
. He is a professor of Ancient History at University
. He is a classic, a scholar who specializes
in Greek antiquity, the historical anthropology of sport and
the history of social inequalities. And today we're focusing
on his book, The Dangerous Life and Ideas Of
Diogenes, The Cynic. So Jean Manuel, welcome
to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you. Thank you. It's a pleasure to
be there. So, just before we get into
diogenes self, just to get a little bit of
historical background, historical context to the period where he
lived. So uh back then, uh te tell
us about this idea about how, how apparently back
then uh many ancient Greek philosophers thought of philosophy as
a way of life. And why perhaps this is
relevant for discussing uh diogenes philosophy. Yes. Uh
You have different uh uh form of uh Greek and
Roman philosophies who are conceived as a uh ethic philosophy
, meaning philosophy of life, uh philosophy, which
is providing a kind of uh uh moral compass,
moral scheme uh to uh organize your choices and to
decide what is wrong and what is right in life
. And the, the, the maybe the beginning
of this movement is uh with Socrates. And the
Diogenes is a pupil of Antisthenes, which is who
is a pupil of Socrates. So you have this
kind of Greek tradition of uh um building um schools
of thought uh which are a way of life,
ways of life at the same time. And cynicism
is strongly based on these ideas, ideas that you
cannot be only uh a philosopher producing ideas, but
you have to uh leave them in your everyday life
. So you cannot be only a scholar. You
have to be a kind of agent of your philosophy
. And what was basically the context of the wider
Mediterranean world back in the fourth century BC, which
is apparently when Diogenes lived. Yeah, he's born
at the end of the fifth century BC and he
died during the 300 twenties uh around that. Um
So, yeah, he's a man of the fourth
century BC. Uh It's a, it's an opening
world, meaning that there is a kind of very
dynamic international economy at the time and lots of conflicts
too around the Aegean Sea. And the thing is
we have what is interesting is there are lots of
foreigners moving from one city to the other and diogenes
was one of them because he suffered from an exile
. He had to exile from his city, Sy
up on the Black Greek City and is one of
these many thousands of foreigners going from one city to
another. And the fourth century BC is really a
moment when we see lots of foreigners in different cities
, we cannot really observe that before. There were
some foreigners at the fifth or the sixth century BC
in the cities, cities were not closed communities but
maybe not so many. Mhm So maybe that's,
that's the first thing. The second thing is you
have at the same time in the fourth century,
you have very little cities, meaning with 3000 inhabitants
. And you have also very large ones like Syracuse
like Alexandria at the end of the first century,
like Rhodes, like Athens and Corinth and Athens and
Corinth were two of the largest cities of the time
. And Diogenes choose to live alternately in each of
them. He was living during the, during the
the winter in Athens and during the summer in in
, in Corinth. So he was living in very
large city which are very specific kind of city,
city with a lot of different nationalities, people from
all over the Mediterranean world. So tell us a
little bit about perhaps what were some of the main
events in the life of diogenes that you think really
played the biggest role in shaping his philosophy? Because
I mean, I know that he was exiled at
a certain point and then he leave the situation there
in different cities. So tell us a little bit
about why, why that happened and why he basically
had to be moving between different cities because I guess
that then later on plays a role in aspects of
his way of thinking and philosophy. Um yeah,
he is, he is in exile. So he
, he has to flee from his city for a
very specific reason. He was involved with his father
uh in a kind of uh money counterfeiting affair case
. And uh he had to go away to avoid
prison or even execution. So he left his city
. We don't know exactly when, but it could
be in the 300 sixties around that, that he
had to leave the city. And I think his
exile in the fourth century BC doesn't mean the same
maybe or maybe it means the same as today.
It's a very hard uh experiment of life. It's
considered by ancient people as the kind of ultimate uh
detachment, uh ultimate loss. Uh Because when I
was talking about lots of foreigners in the 400 century
world, most of them were coming back on a
regular basis to their city, their original cities,
they were just moving from one to the other doing
some uh trade, but they were back to the
city. And then you have exiles and exile is
a very complicated thing because then it means you lose
your complete social environment, you lose the ability to
get buried when you die in your, the earth
, the ground of your motherland, which means a
lot to an ancient Greek of the, of the
time. So this, this is the first really
traumatic experience of diogenes uh life. And um this
is the beginning, in fact of his philosophical career
, we don't know if uh two months, six
months, two years, five years uh happened before
or between the exile and the beginning of the philosophical
life. But we know that there is a kind
of very strong link between the two episodes. Uh
The thing is when you lose attached to your,
to your city, uh you lose your, your
main belonging, you were suppose in a Greek world
, you are supposed to belong to your family,
to your neighborhood, to your village, to your
city mainly. And then you, you are apart
from this uh belonging and this kind of experience of
detachment uh had a strong effect on uh um the
way uh diogenes conceived his philosophy because cynicism is a
philosophy of detachment. You are, you are supposed
to refuse uh every kind of belonging. You're not
supposed to get married, you're not supposed to build
a family. Uh Family is a cultural construct.
City is a cultural construct. So uh there is
a, there is a clear link between the experience
of exile and the, the way diogenes shaped uh
cynicism philosophy, cynic philosophy. So this is one
of the main ways we got into the idea of
cosmopolitan, cosmopolitanism, right. Yeah, this is
one of the routes. Uh There is maybe a
second uh context uh element which is Sinop is the
original city. Is a native uh city, is
a city on the south shore of the Black Sea
, uh meaning uh north of Asia Minor. Uh
And here at the time, there are lots of
um barbarian uh ethnic. Many of them were in
the Persian Empire and were, which are in contact
with uh Syn O or threatening Syn up on the
other Greek cities of the Black Sea, meaning that
very early diogenes had a personal experience of the relationship
with other culture, other ethnic non-greek uh people.
Uh So, so the, the cosmopolitanism, which
is uh which is credited of the invention um the
cosmopolitanism uh is at the same time, can be
understood as a, as a consequence of his exile
. And at the same time, uh of his
experience of uh barbarian uh ethnic and conflicts in Asia
Minor. Yes. And by the way back then
, because uh in the kind of world we live
in nowadays, things work, I guess very differently
. But back then moving, for example, between
cities and between states, I mean, how hard
or easy was it? Because I mean, I
imagine that back then people didn't have really documentation and
but then when it came to, for example,
the social and political status of an exile or someone
was not considered a citizen. I mean, how
did it work back then? I would imagine it
would vary between, for example, city states in
Greece, how would they deal with those kinds of
people? But how was it back then? A
living that way? Yes. Yes, there are
different situations. Every city is a kind of,
is a city state. So it's a kind of
very little nation if you want. So, so
, so you have a body of citizens. They
are the one with the power, the political power
, uh and the the uh judiciary power. So
they, they go, they, they are working
in courts, they are working in the assembly,
in the councils, et cetera, then you are
foreigners. So if you are in exile, uh
the normal situation, if you are free, if
you're not a slave, the normal situation is,
is is that you will be a resident for now
. Uh then in some very specific situations, some
cities including Athens um build some uh like exclusive personal
status from uh for exiles coming from a city that
is a kind of ally city. So when you
have a civil war in an allied city and when
the democratic people are exiled from their city, it
has happened in the fifth and the fourth century,
we see that Athens built some very um um exclusive
with some privileged uh personal status for this group of
exiles. But this didn't happen to diogenes when he
arrived in Athens or in Corinth, he was only
just a kind of resident foreigner. So you have
to register, uh and you have to pay taxes
as a resident foreigner, which is very important.
It's not very expensive, but it's very important because
if you don't, you are suspected to try to
pretend you're a citizen. If you don't pay the
foreigner tax, then you are, you can suffer
a trial and there are some heavy risk uh with
that coming. So uh the the situation where you
are moving from one city to the other is is
that you will be uh if you are there for
some days or some weeks, you will be like
a provisory foreigner and then there is no administration,
but you have no rights either. Meaning that if
you are threatened, beaten, stolen, you have
no way to defend yourself in court. Uh But
then when you are a resident for Rena, then
you have a kind of protection from the city,
but you have no political right, no judiciary,
right? Meaning you, you cannot, uh you
cannot vote in a court, you cannot vote in
an assembly, you cannot be a magistrate. So
that's the situation for free people. Of course,
for, if you are suspected to be a slave
, then the situation is even different. And by
the way, diogenes himself was a slave for a
little while. Yes. Uh during the 300 forties
, it's been abducted by pirates, which was a
very not, not common that uh not unusual event
. There are lots of pirates in the Aegean and
Mediterranean Sea at the time. And even Alexander,
the Great had to uh to fight against pirates around
crete for some time. Uh And uh yes,
so the pirates were attacking villages, they were abducting
people and then uh two ways. The first way
is they were asking for a ransom and they were
giving back the people they had abducted if they got
the ransom. First situation, second situation, they
were um going away from the place where they did
the abduction and selling everyone on a market slave.
That's what happened to diogenes. It's been uh it's
been sold to a Corinthian uh Man Xenia. And
after some years he's been released, freed and franchised
. So, yes, he, he had an
exper a personal experience of uh uh slavery. He's
not the only philosopher who had that experience, but
he's one, he's one of them and lots of
people had this experience and this fear to be abducted
by pirates. Yes. Mhm And I mean,
of course, I imagine that he was exposed to
different cultures. So was the uh cultural relativist in
any way. Yes. Uh Yeah, in a
way you could, you could say that he,
he, he, he had the idea that lots
of uh things in everyday social life were culturally,
culturally built. So uh he was uh looking as
most of social conventions as convention on social customs as
customs, meaning for diogenes, marriage was a cultural
uh custom, family was a cultural uh custom wealth
as a cultural custom. So in a way,
uh when you develop this kind of uh um philosophy
, you could, you could say you are a
cultural relativist meaning that you are. But the thing
is he was, he was not interested in comparing
culture was interesting and uh in opposing culture and nature
. Yeah. And basically, I guess that through
his life experiences, it became easier for him to
basically question norms. He spent most of his life
doing that. Absolutely. Doing, trying to uh
to unbuilt uh uh norms and to, to not
, not always to contest them but to question them
to, to make people understand that they were only
customs norms and they were not facts uh by nature
. So it was a, it is a big
part of uh uh cynicism uh that the to,
to, to point at uh culturally built uh ways
of life. Yes. Mhm A and the uh
in the book, you also talk about how one
of his ideas was about attacking uh power, glory
and the obs the obsession some people have with social
status. Could you tell us about that uh attack
, you said glory and of social status and obsession
with social status. In fact, for diogenes,
there are important matters, philosophical ones and they are
superficial matters and to Search for power is a kind
of super, super act to search for glory.
If you are an athlete or political um um leader
or a military leader is a, is a superficial
one. And to search for better status too,
meaning that uh for dere, if you are a
slave, you don't need to search for freedom.
If you are a foreigner, you don't need to
search for citizenship. If you are a citizen,
you don't need to search for uh kind of better
political position in your city. All of these are
superficial goals. They are not helping you uh in
a philosophical way to behave uh better uh without um
pursuing uh artificial goals. So uh one of the
parts of cynicism was to point at those um artificial
uh artificial goals and intentions. You are supposed to
go back to what is essential, what is necessary
needs uh not nothing uh extravagant and the power is
considered as a kind of uh useless uh goal and
glory to a athletes are attacked on a regular basis
because they are uh two diogenes, eyes focused uh
on uh the search of glory instead of being focused
on the search of philosophy. And of course,
he ended up living in poverty most of his life
. And in the book, he talked about how
he distinguished between the fact of poverty and the feeling
of poverty. So, what's the distinction there?
Yes. So it's uh the distinction is very popular
in the philosophical field of the end of the fifth
century and the beginning of the fourth century. So
, eogene is like uh uh um appropriating an idea
that has always been uh that, that has been
, I'm sorry, that has been formulated before him
, by Socrates, by uh antisthenes, by Xenophobe
. So it's a very popular idea uh which is
the distinction between the fact of poverty and the feeling
of poverty, meaning uh indigenous point of view,
you have to make a distinction between people who are
uh like uh really poor because they have absolutely nothing
to live and survive and people uh who feel poor
because there are more needs that they have means,
meaning that you can uh extremely wealthy, you can
be one of the wealthiest men of your city.
But if you have uh piled uh lots of obligations
, uh financial ones, personal ones, maybe you
are in difficulty to face all these obligations. So
, uh the, the idea is that you have
to, to see if someone is rich or poor
, you have to look at what he needs on
a regular basis. So he does he have a
frugal life or not? And what are his means
? And even if you have big means, if
you have bigger needs because you are organizing banquets for
your friends all the time because you are financing very
expensive um programs in the city, et cetera.
Maybe you will suffer from a feeling of poverty,
even if not, if on the paper, you're
not poor at all. So that's a kind of
very interesting distinction because it's, it's been um uh
it's still in use in uh contemporary sociology, the
distinction between fact and feeling of poverty. And it
came from uh those from the Socratic school. In
fact, Socrates, Antisthenes xenophobia, genist. So
yes, and this is linked with um this question
, in fact, is linked with the um a
kind of revolution in the intellectual world of the 4th
, 5th, 4th century BC, which is the
part of the idea of economy. Um at the
end of the fifth century and the beginning of the
fourth. So around 400 BC, we have a
series of new words, words uh in the Greek
lexicon were appearing in the language uh meaning uh econom
, uh economical, economical, economia, economia,
we gave that gave birth to our economy, uh
econom uh which mean someone which mean a manager of
his household, uh econo, which means uh someone
uh who has some qualities in management in his private
household. Uh What I'm trying to tell is at
the end of the fifth and beginning of the first
century, there are some new words to describe a
reality which is new to Greek Ice at the time
, which is the uh economic management. Before that
nobody has ever developed a kind of uh thought about
this economic world. And suddenly uh it appears to
Greeks that it is, it is something you have
to understand. And uh of course, as it's
the same time when you have a new discipline appearing
, there is no economist at the time. So
all um the people who are thinking about this new
economy are philos of philosophers. So every uh uh
philosophical school of the time uh has produced some economic
treaties about this question of management. What it is
to uh to be rich, to be poor,
what it, how do you organize your household or
how do you manage your slave? How do you
choose your wife, et cetera, which are considered
as economic questions a and related to his uh to
diogenes econom, economic ideas. There's also this idea
of his criticizing a system governing the accumulation and distribution
of wealth. Right? Yes, absolutely. In
different ways uh In diogenes, ice money, coins
are a cultural construct. They are useless. So
we shouldn't need coins to, to trade, for
example. So that's maybe the first level. But
the second level is that wealth is not a goal
. You, you, you shouldn't try to get
richer because it's useless. You should do the opposite
. You should try to feel rich by um decreasing
your, your needs. So, in the relationship
between means and needs, uh it says, OK
, people are focused on increasing their means. They
shouldn't, they should be focused on decreasing their needs
. And this is cynic uh way of life.
You are supposed to live a very simple, very
frugal, very aic oric uh life. So yes
, that's, that's the idea that's uh wealth on
the field of wealth and patrimony and owning uh is
uh something you have to fight against. This is
useless and this is even more useless in diogenes eyes
because you're not supposed to build a family on the
dynasty. So in Greeks eyes, you are supposed
to build wealth patrimony household because you want to give
it to your heirs. So this is a family
matter, you are supposed to, to transfer to
provide, to increase the family wealth and to give
it to the next generation. And diogenes says we
don't need to make kids and and we don't need
to uh transfer any kind of wealth. So everything
is linked in a way, the the the need
for our family and the need for the source of
wealth are both uh contested in scenic point of view
and related to the distribution of wealth. Did we
care about economic inequality? For example? No.
Uh you couldn't say that really. Uh there is
no uh um social conscience in a cynicism in a
way we could say that in a, in a
, in a modern world. Uh for, for
diogenes, this is an individual question that is not
really like a social categories uh that we have to
improve the situation as the way to improve your situation
is to live a philosophical life. So it's not
uh um social aid won't help you. Uh Anyway
, social aid in the Greek City is a very
, very tiny uh uh matter for everyone. But
apart from that endogenous uh point of view, like
you said, with the fact of poverty and the
feeling of poverty, that's what you have to deal
with is this uh ability to feel rich and this
is a very individual matter, you have to face
it by yourself. So as long as you don't
, again, for, for cynics, you,
you are not supposed to belong to any kind of
category, including social category. And of course,
he was also a mendicant philosopher, he practiced mendicancy
. And back then, how did uh Greeks look
at that way of living? I mean, was
that also a sort of violation of some norms in
Greek society? Yeah, you could say that.
Yes. Uh It's uh um for Greek of the
first century, a beggar is a parasite basically.
Uh It is considered as a parasite because the main
um uh the main social value in the relationship is
, is what they call Philia, which is a
known philosophical concept. We uh we often uh translate
it by friendship, but the the closest translation would
be will be reciprocity. Uh So uh what does
it mean? It means that you are in a
world where there is no social security, there is
no insurance, meaning that the level of protection on
, on security and safe social safety you can get
is heavily linked with the number of um reciprocal relationship
. You build with people, with your friends,
with your family, with your neighbors, with uh
the citizens of your city. So uh you build
relationship. What does it mean in everyday life?
It means that if you have a sacrifice, you
sacrifice an animal because you have, you are uh
organizing the wedding of your daughter, for example.
Uh then if you don't invite your neighbor, you
will come to your neighbor and you will give your
neighbor a piece of the sacrifice because maybe in two
months, in three months, you will have a
problem. You will be on your field and you
will break a tool and you will need your neighbor
to, to borrow uh a tool. So uh
um that's, that's the way Greeks understand social life
. You are, you are giving to people and
they are giving to you when you need something.
So it works in the family. It works with
one. It, it works with neighbors. The
thing is uh um beggars, they don't, they
are not part of that uh like virtual circle.
They are away from that because they never give anything
. Basically, they only ask for arms. So
uh they are considered as a um lost causes if
you want. There is a uh a Greek proverb
saying something like uh uh not even uh um not
even a beggar's parents or his friends. Uh So
So, meaning that you, if you are a
beggar, you are alone, you are by yourself
. Uh So they are the, the, the
basic conception of a man decency is that uh beggars
are parasites. And then cynics come and they change
the, the, the pattern. They say uh
that of course, they ask for something, they
ask for arms, but in exchange, they provide
philosophy, they provide advice, they provide wisdom,
they provide clarity of thinking, et cetera. So
they are giving something in return. And that is
a Greek word to say, to ask for S
uh E and there is a Greek word to say
to give something in return at it. Meaning that
in the, in the Greek conception, in the
cynic conception, I mean, uh the fact of
begging is not a parasite attitude. It's a kind
of give and take attitude. So that is what
is really new with uh um uh cynic uh philosophy
. It is um giving birth to the, the
idea that a beggar uh the life of begging can
be a life of philosophy. And by the way
, of course, we tend to associate diogenes very
much with the with these jar. I mean,
many times people talk about it as being a barrel
and not a jar, we can get into that
. But why is the jar so important as a
sort of symbol of his life? Why do people
associate him so much with the jar? Um be
first, it's a symbol first. It's a symbol
uh of uh um of frugality of uh life of
uh uh economy. Uh a very uh uh OIC
life, very simple life. So that's first,
that's a symbol. But the thing is in real
life, that's the way it could be for some
people. Some people were living in empty graves,
in cabins, in huts, in tents and in
jars. And we know that from the fifth century
during the Peronne Asian War, we have some uh
text mainly a text from toy leaders, the historian
, the main historian of the Peronne Asian War.
Uh and he's explaining and he's giving details about the
way um Athenian people had to leave when they took
refuge inside the walls of the city in 431.
And we have information about these temporary shelters, temporary
accommodations and it is empty graves. It is tents
and it is jars. They use jars because those
jars are what Greek call pit oil are very large
, very high ceramic jars. They can be more
than 2 m high. We still have some,
some of them thanks to the archaeology of it.
And uh uh they can be very high. They
were used to store food, to store uh uh
grain cereals and different kind of uh different kind of
uh of food. And most of the time they
were put inside the ground like uh uh you have
to dig to put them half of them in the
ground to, to make them stable and then you
could use them in a crisis situation to live in
it. So, and that's what diogenes did in
Athens in the, in the edges of the Ara
, uh, in the metro sanctuary. He had
a jar and he decided to leave to live there
. No, we have no idea how the jar
arrived there, but it must have been a jar
from the sanctuary and then it was empty and uh
someone maybe cleaned it, maybe not. Uh anyway
, he, he used it uh to, to
live there for, for some time. So it's
not a tale or legend. It's a uh it's
a normal um uh crisis uh housing in certain,
in certain context. So when uh when Diogenes in
the 300 sixties, 300 fifties did that in Athens
, lots of Athenians had already seen some people living
in this kind of drought. So this is no
surprise. Uh for them, this is not a
kind of abnormal way of living. It's not usual
on the Agora, but it's not totally uh unique
or crazy. And then uh the story has uh
changed in Roman times when uh Latin philosophers and Latin
writers began to tell Diogenes story in Latin. And
they had to translate from Phos the Greek work to
the draw to a kind of uh Latin equivalent.
And they used uh do mainly uh which is a
way to say barrel, uh a cask, wooden
cask. And uh but when they did that translation
, they knew they were uh um they knew that
the original word was meaning ceramic jar. They were
just adjusting to their uh l uh But then after
that, the memory of that got lost in the
way. And after, during some centuries, we've
been uh describing painting, showing, telling that diogenes
lived in a barrel. So we have lots of
uh modern paintings, for example, with uh Diogenes
in um in a barrel and lots of books talking
about Diogenes barrel, which is a pure le for
, this is a pure legend because when Diogenes was
alive in the first century BC, there was no
wooden barrel on earth. The, the first uh
cask um the first barrels uh to store wine uh
appeared. Uh We have some archaeological data and we
have some text appeared during the first century BC.
So basically 300 years after the Eugene's life. So
he has never lived in a barrel in Athens.
He lived in a jar and this jar is uh
uh is uh at the same time, a kind
of um he is reflecting the place of the,
the role of ceramic stuff in everyday life. There
is a lot of ceramic uh vessel in uh in
uh everyday life in Athens. At the time,
there is a huge ceramic uh production area in the
north of uh of Athens called Krauss. Mhm.
And of course, as a foreigner and a mendicant
philosopher back then, of course, he had very
low social status. But I guess that a class
of people that probably were even lower in social status
than him were the slaves. And so, because
we've already mentioned, hear that he was a slave
in himself for a while. What ideas did he
have about slaves? I mean, how did they
think about them? Did they think that they were
like other common citizens? They, they were the
same as other people or not? Yeah. The
, the uh uh to diogenes mind it is status
is irrelevant in a way. So you are as
free as you want to be, whatever is your
status. So there is no like a political claim
uh against, against slavery. Um But the idea
is that you um what is interesting uh diogenes is
less slavery than dependence. You are um you are
free if you do not depend, if you don't
depend of any kind of uh uh specific uh need
. So you have to, to build uh the
strongest autonomy, you can the strongest freedom and this
you can do inside a slave life. So the
fact that you are a slave doesn't mean that you
cannot live a philosophical life in diogenes uh point of
view. So uh slavery in a way is not
a very um important matter in a way that uh
cynics use it mainly as a model as a metaphorical
model to dependence. You are, the point is
to try not to be depend of dependent of anything
. Meaning that if you are a master and if
you own many slaves, but if your full life
depends on your slave, if you are unable to
do anything by yourself, and if you have a
level of comfort that is uh strongly based on the
way you own slave, you are in fact more
a slave than your slaves. So, so in
uh in diogenes point of view, again, it's
a question of uh we would say to the per
personal development. Uh you, you, you have
to be able to uh to build uh a kind
of space of freedom in your life. Whatever is
your status. Of course, if you have a
free status, it will be easier, but uh
it will come with more obligations sometimes. So maybe
it will be more difficult in a way. So
when you say that uh slaves are even a harder
situation that uh um foreigners, in fact with uh
beggars, we, we could ask the question because
in a way laves there are some uh they have
some reciprocal relationship with the master with all the slaves
. So they can, they can have kind of
uh some protections in a way that beggars won't get
from anyone. So, so sometimes uh slaved as
other better lives than beggars or may maybe a more
protected one even. Mhm Yeah. Perhaps I was
thinking more about the sort of modern point of view
where being a slave would be worse than being a
beggar because at least the beggar would have more freedom
. Yeah. Yeah. But you're on paper,
you're absolutely right on paper. The, the worst
stages is to be a state. But the thing
is in everyday life, some slaves have uh money
, have a comfort, comfortable life and can be
protected. Meaning if they have a value to their
master and if they are molested by someone, the
master will prosecute injustice for them. So uh uh
which that this is something that nobody will do for
a be so, so uh so um that's a
complex situation. That's a complex situation. So,
getting into other aspects of diogenes philosophy, it is
pleasure, a legitimate desire for diogenes and the cynics
more generally. Um All the cynics didn't have the
same uh opinion about that. Antinous uh with a
kind of master of Diogenes. Um Antus was refusing
pleasure at least as far as we can understand antinous
philosophical proposal. So, uh which uh Diogenes didn't
do uh part of life. Uh So uh scenic
philosophy with diogenes and after diogenes is not uh um
refusal of pleasure, philosophy. Um the thing is
again, is the question of autonomy and dependence.
Pleasure is a problem. If you are dependent of
a pleasure, you can drink some wine. But
if you need to drink wine every, every week
or at every banquet. There is a problem.
You can have a sexual life. But, uh
, if you are addicted to it, it's a
problem. You can, you have the right to
love food and to enjoy a good piece of bread
and nice olive oil. It's no problem with that
. But again, if you cannot live without it
, then it's a problem. So, pleasure is
not in itself, um, uh, has no
moral issue or ethical issue in itself. The question
is uh if you are dependent of one or other
kind of pleasure and, and how did they think
about other animals? Did they see? Did they
look in any way at other animals as a possible
model for human conduct? At least to some extent
? Yes. Uh Yeah, the, the the
animals are model to uh to scenic uh meaning that
uh they have an ability uh to uh simplicity,
to oar to uh frugality, which is much bigger
than men. So in the scenic point of view
, you have gods on the top, you have
animals in the middle and you have men in the
bottom. So that's the cynic hierarchy of the uh
world in a way. And then you have um
wise uh men, philosophers that sometimes uh can be
higher than the animals, but lower than the gods
like in between. But uh for normal um animals
are supposed to be a model first because they live
a life of simplicity. They don't have so many
needs uh and they adjust uh their uh needs to
their means. Um So they live a life of
, of frugality and then some specific animals in the
scenic point of view, like dogs will have some
uh uh qualities uh uh that should be inspiring.
Uh dogs are low. Uh They are honest.
Uh they are, again, they live a simple
, very simple life so you can give them a
bone and they will be very happy with that.
So, uh the, the idea is that the
animal world and some of the animals specifically uh can
be used as a model for, for human conduct
. Yes. Mhm. And related some other,
let's say norms in Greek society. Of course,
we've already talked a little bit here about marriage for
example. But what worries views exactly about things like
marriage, pity and prostitution. Um So marriage is
a cultural construct in a scenic point of view.
So you are uh you are not supposed to try
to get married. So we have one exception.
Uh uh one of diogenes pupils, Krates who got
married with Hipaa. But it was a very strange
marriage was basically unbuilding every rule of uh marriage.
So it's not very classical uh marriage, you could
say. So, uh marriage is a social convention
. Uh pacy is, it's a very common practice
in Athens in the fourth century BC, meaning that
uh uh for me, for most of men,
adult men, I mean, free men citizen or
foreigner, but free men. Uh It was normal
to, um, you had like basically two sexual
options on the table if I could say that,
um, women and boys when I say boys,
I mean, uh, boys, uh which are
not adults yet. So let's say 10 to 20
boys if you want 20 years boys. Um So
this was considered as a kind of too equal uh
possibility to, uh, to live a sexual life
. And you, lots of men were leaving the
both possibilities in parallel. Uh So this is a
very common way uh um to, to do things
. Uh But we have no uh not a single
detail about any pistic relationship of diogenes. The only
anecdotes we have around that are presenting him as a
kind of protector of kids. Uh Not someone who
was uh using them, using them for pleasure or
not someone who was using pacy as a way to
educate kids because that's why that's the way Greeks were
describing this social practice, a way to um get
boys to become uh citizens, adults through a personal
, intimate and intellectual relationship. Uh So, uh
to, to no marriage, basically, no pity
and uh with prostitution. Uh You asked, uh
we know that he had a personal relationship with the
Athenian uh prostitute but not uh um not a relationship
involving money. So it was not as far as
we know, it was not a commercial trade uh
relationship. It was a kind of uh love uh
uh normal, intimate personal uh relationship. So,
uh um again, with prostitution uh in diogenes uh
conception, apart from his personal life, the,
the question is the level of dependence. So he
was making fun of people were going on a regular
basis to see prostitutes because in diogene ice and in
scenic Ice, this was a red flag. It
meant that you were, you were dependent of it
, of this kind of pleasure. And this was
a problem in a philosophical point of view. If
you cannot live without it, then you have to
uh to face the philosophical issue. It is.
Mhm And what were his views on athletic competition?
Exercise and health? Um So, so maybe there
are two parts. Uh the, the, the
, the, the, the exercise uh is uh
good in a cen point of view, you are
supposed to uh exercise your body because your body is
the main tool of your everyday philosophy. So you
are supposed to be uh to try to be in
good shape, to uh to strengthen your, your
, your body, to train it. Uh And
diogenes was known to um even to twist some athletic
exercises like uh uh what you would say, I
am not sure what is the English word to say
that like there was some uh gym, gymnastic exercises
with statue, like statue grabbing, you were working
with statue with positions, statues that were in the
gymnasium. And instead of using it for wrestling techniques
to, to train some wrestling techniques and attitudes,
diogenes was using these statues when they were covered with
snow in winter to grab them and to uh um
train to resist to the cold. So, uh
and that's a good anecdote because it's showing that at
the same time to exercise your body, to strengthen
your body was important, but it was not to
uh uh to prepare to some competition or to improve
in some very specific technical uh sport. And that's
why I was saying that there are like two parts
to the answer. The first thing is health is
important because the body has to be strong to help
the philosophy. But then sport athletes competition, that's
something that has a very uh strong uh and uh
unfavorable opinion because uh competition again is um a frame
to search for glory. So uh athletes are focused
on the search for glory uh which is a problem
in a phys view. We, we talked about
it and the second is they are uh so focused
on that, that they are only training their body
and they are not um having a kind of uh
um intellectual uh development of education in parallel. So
in diogenes point of view, uh the problem with
athletics is at the same time, the obsession for
victory and the, the fact that you neglect to
develop your mind and not only your, your,
your body So the, the view on uh exercise
is positive but the view on athletics is negative.
And of course, another interesting thing about diogenes is
that he was all about speaking one's mind freely and
sometimes that would entail insulting reprimanding sarcasm. So te
tell us about that. Um Yeah, that's one
of the, um, maybe most interesting part of
the philosophy of uh cynics are in a way.
Um They, they, they consider, they have
a kind of mission you could say. So they
are trying to get more people come to philosophy,
philosophical ideas, philosophical attitude and, and life.
So you have to go to people and to provide
some philosophical experience by talking with them by dialogue,
et cetera. Uh including insult, including uh sarcasm
. Every way is good to uh to um to
force people to philosophy. So the, that's,
that's really a kind of philosophy with uh no old
bar in a way that you, you, you
, you uh cynic philosophers consider they have the right
to do everything if it helps philosophy or if it
helps someone to come to philosophy. So they will
use every means to provoke philosophical conversation, philosophical uh
situations. The key principle is uh what the Greek
called parea, meaning, meaning, uh uh freedom
of speech, speaking freely, speaking tersely, uh
uh speaking with no um specific courts of any kind
. Uh Because Cortesi is a social convention on what
you have to do is to force people to understand
they are not living a life of philosophy and to
try to convince them to, to try to live
a philosophical life. So, yes, that is
uh uh one of the main tools of uh cynics
when they try to convince other people to come to
philosophy is uh freedom of speech, Parecia. So
uh very, sometimes very aggressive way to uh to
get in contact with people. And do you think
that his defense of speaking one's mind and being honest
relates in any way with these hate toward demagogues and
populists? Yes, you, you could say that
you could say that um the thing is uh populist
uh in uh uh political life of uh cities,
big cities or little cities, but mainly big cities
like Athens. Um There are people who are trying
to get some political power. Um And we are
ready to say whatever citizens uh want to hear.
So, uh the main uh tool of a populist
is to lie uh to life, to get uh
the power you want to get to, to be
able to uh decide of some uh of the political
lines of the community. So, uh at the
same time, they are lying, which is uh
in a scenic point of view, uh not an
appropriate way of behaving. And at the same time
, they are pursuing an artificial goal which is power
. Uh So they behave dishonestly on the search for
uh something which is uh in fact useless. So
for these two reasons, uh you, you could
say that uh um to speak one's mind is in
contradiction with the populist uh model. So the scenic
way of speaking, one's mind is in contradiction with
the, with the populist and demagogue model. Yes
. And, and there are certain very curious supposed
episodes in diogenes life, like for example, his
supposed encounter with Alexander, the great that people disseminate
a lot, but we are actually not sure if
that really happened, right? Uh Yeah, we
cannot be sure. The thing is the, the
question is, do we have reason to believe it
happened? That's, that's the main question we could
, we could ask. Yes. Uh And uh
yes, we have reason to believe the met.
Uh First Alexander had a strong interest uh to philosophy
. He's been educated partly by Aristotle and he made
several, he met, sorry, several philosophers through
his lives. For example, Kates when he,
when he was in t uh et cetera. And
uh so uh if Alexander had an opportunity to meet
Diogenes, there is no reason to doubt that they
didn't meet. And the thing is they had some
opportunities mainly during the 303 100 in 338 when Diogenes
was involved in the Kona battle in which Alexander was
involved too. Uh And in 336 2 years later
, uh Diogenes was during a part of the year
in Athens during the other part of the year in
Corinth. And Alexander went during that year in those
two cities and even twice in Corinth during that year
. So yes, to answer your question clearly,
we cannot be sure, but we have many good
reasons Alexander would have been interested to meet theogenes.
He had several opportunities to do it. And we
have text describing the uh the encounter, of course
, the the the texts are describing the encounter in
a very legend way. So, so uh behind
your question, I think that's, that's what you
mean. Is there, is there a part of
legend in here? And yes, there, there
is, there must be a part of legend in
it. And the legend goes quite far because the
legend tells us that they died the same day.
Uh So they are supposed to have died the same
day. We know exactly when uh Alexander died during
the night of the 10th to the 11th of June
323. We have no clue for diogenes. We
have some reason to believe he's dead during the 300
twenties, maybe in 323. This is possible,
but we have no detail and clearly this detail,
the idea that they are, they died at the
exact same day. This is a part of the
legend, Greeks love this kind of uh synchronic events
or alleged synchronic events. So there are some parts
that are completely probable and some parts that are um
likely legends. But, but when diogenes died,
I mean, as, at least as far as
we know, we must have been in his,
uh, like early eighties or something like that.
Yeah, we have, we don't know, we
have different information about the date of birth. So
I wouldn't, uh, give a precise age but
we know he was around 80 a bit more than
, uh, 80. Yes. Uh, absolutely
. Uh, it's difficult to be more uh more
precise. Yeah, because we don't know when he
died and we don't know when he's born. So
, yeah. And by the way, when it
comes to his death, how did he die?
And in this particular case, what does it matter
? Uh uh the the way a philosopher dies does
it matter and why? Yes. So, so
, so for the first part of your question,
we have several um versions of his death with different
, different dates and different context. So uh for
the way he died, we have at least four
different version. One saying that he died of eating
a raw octopus uh trying to demonstrate that cooking was
useless. Um Why one that he died of an
infection after being bitten by dogs with which he was
disputing a piece of octopus. Uh One telling us
that he died of self suffocation uh on the car
in Khan, on the heel of the car in
Khan with his own cloak. Um One telling us
that he died of fever So of course, he
cannot um he, he cannot have been uh killed
by these four reasons. So most of them are
wrong, maybe all of them, which is likely
uh he might have just died of age. He
was a very old man. And uh so we
have, we have no clue. But I think
is why do we have so many legends? Because
exactly that's the question you ask is, is there
a physical way of dying? And this is,
these legends are a way to express the idea that
there is a philosophical way of uh of dying in
ancient times. The death of a philosopher is supposed
to be uh the the last uh demonstration of his
philosophy. So uh we have lots of anecdotes,
biographical anecdotes about philosopher showing that they were um uh
either very close to their philosophy when they die when
they died or on the contrary, extremely far from
their philosophy are in contradiction with their philosophy when they
, when they died. So there is a uh
very uh there's a huge interest in the scientific uh
ancient world about the death of uh philosophers because again
, this is this idea that philosophy uh can be
demonstrated through your actions and your death is in a
way the last even it's the last even of your
life. Did you leave it in a philosophical way
or did you not? And diogenes is not an
exception. The legends around his life are in a
way exploring the idea of, did he, did
he live a scenic death or not? Yeah.
The, there's also that, uh tale II,
I would call it a tale because I am not
100% sure if it's true or not, but about
epicurus where I mean, because of the way he
fought about that and now we shouldn't fear death that
he apparently, he died with a very severe illness
and he apparently was suffering a lot. But because
of his idea of death, he should have died
peacefully. Right. Yeah, exactly. That's another
example, I guess. Yeah. Yeah, you
have, in fact, uh lots of examples that
have been gathered by a French researcher some years ago
in an article Lucien Jaron, which it's an article
in French, which is uh the southern, the
southern way of death of dying of ancient philosophers.
So, yes, you're right there, there are
lots of examples and some of them are dying exactly
the way you are. They are expected to die
and others are like uh in full contradiction. So
it's, it's a, it's a, it's a
way, it's a funny part of the philosophical history
of philosophy, if I could say by the way
, in, in what ways did die is relate
philosophically intellectually, of course, to some of the
other very prominent Greek philosophers like Socrates and Plato,
they, they have something to say about their philosophy
or the, their way of doing philosophy or something
like that. Yeah. Uh wi with uh um
Diogenes as far as we know, as a kind
of uh um very critic uh opinion about Socrates and
extremely critic uh opinion about Plato. Uh the,
the that uh he was considering Plato that a kind
of um ne negation of uh of the principle of
uh philosophy in action. The, the main critic
Diogenes was uh uh doing at uh uh Plato and
Plato's philosophy. That was that he was not living
a life of philosophy. It was just like producing
philosophical ideas, but you couldn't see. And then
in his uh everyday uh life, so he wasn't
, he was useless in, in Diogenes's point of
view, plateau was uh uh was useless. And
he says that he said something like uh of what's
used for us. He is a man who's been
philosophy for uh so long and has yet not upset
uh anyone. So he was considering him as a
kind of a lost cause someone was producing very high
level philosophical ideas, but that we are not grounded
. So that was the main critic. And about
, you know, the idea of the human being
, the way a plateau defined what is a human
being. So, meaning a biped uh with no
leaves um with no feathers, sorry with no feathers
. Um And then uh uh Theogenes says the legend
uh took a rooster plucked, the, the rooster
came to the um to uh Plato's gymnasium and said
this is Plato's human being uh to, to,
to make fun to the, this kind of philosophical
corpus. So, uh Diogenes was i, in
that way, he was positioning himself against uh plateau's
school that he considered as a kind of very theoretical
philosophy and not a philosophy in action. Mhm.
And uh do we know if Biogen wrote a lot
? Uh I mean, did he write at all
? Uh as far as we know he did,
he did uh essays uh Economic Treaties Tragedies too.
We have two long lists of his opera. Uh
They are not exactly identical. There are reasons for
that but maybe I won't go so far in the
conversation. But, but uh uh we have no
reason to doubt that he wrote. He wrote meaning
that he must have had some kind of material support
, material help. Uh because you need some scrolls
, you need, you need to have some material
to write in ancient times like today, I could
say. Uh but yes, he, he wrote
, he used writing to develop his ideas including tragedies
again, Seattle. Uh But the thing is we
, we lost everything basically apart from a, a
big fragment of his uh um uh Political Philosophy Treaty
uh polit that we, we, we, we
, we, which is, which has been saved
by Philo Dema of Garra and quoted. But apart
from that, we lost uh most of his text
. So we know his philosophy from uh his uh
Apotex. And for his um sayings, so the
, the, the big part of his philosophy,
we, we grasp it, we get uh it's
true uh anecdotes, uh meetings, encounters and the
dialogues he had with uh some people. So some
of these sayings are, must have been close to
the truth, other are very uh rebuilt by time
and uh diff the different philosophical schools that use them
uh to defend cynicism or to attack cynicism. So
sometimes it's a bit difficult to see through this uh
uh very long and complex transmission process to get to
go back to the like original diogenes and which prominent
philosophers uh mentioned having been influenced by diogenes. And
I'm not just asking about the Greek and Roman philosophers
, but basically across history. Um And that's,
that's, I'm not sure I am able to fully
answer to the, to the question. But I
would, to, to my knowledge, the,
the um the philosopher who has been the, maybe
the most influenced by uh diogenes. He will be
Emil Cioran, the Romanian uh philosopher from the 19th
century. Uh a bit uh a bit after that
. He, he died. Uh I don't remember
exactly when he died. I don't know if he
died end of the 20th or beginning of the 21st
. I'm sorry, Emil C Yeah. Yeah,
I know, I know who you're talking about.
I, I just thought that he was born in
the 19th century but perhaps I'm wrong, maybe no
, I wouldn't say that. I don't think so
. I think he's born in the beginning of the
twenties. But you, you maybe, you know
, better. The so, so, so which
was a Romanian philosopher? But he lived in,
not in exile. But yes, he lived in
gold books in Romanian. Then it changed uh to
uh to French on the road the rest of his
life. Uh in um in French, he lived
a very simple uh life uh basically with no uh
family, a very poor life. He didn't work
. Uh He wrote mainly uh a aorist sayings.
So even the way he was communicating philosophy uh as
some has something in common with the way we know
uh diogenes uh philosophy. It was very critical with
basically uh everything in the social uh about social customs
, social conventions. So, um a very uh
uh brutal uh way of looking at uh humans and
their behavior and society. So, um I would
say maybe uh the, the, the, the
, the, the biggest he uh of the 20th
century will be em. Yes. Mhm. And
what about the influence that diogenes might have had on
stoicism? The, did, did they have an
influence there? Yes. Yes. Uh The first
influence is uh genealogy. Uh The, you know
, Socrates are uh antisthenes as a pupil, antitheism
, a diogenes as a pupil uh di direct or
indirect pupil. We, we are not sure that
depending diogenes arrived in Athens before the death of antisthenes
in 366 or after. We're not sure. Diogenes
at Ks as a pupil and CS as Z and
Zeno is the founder of the stoic school of South
. Um So there is a genealogical link. That's
the first thing. The second thing is there is
an ideological link. Yes. Uh Stoics in a
way are like uh civilized cynics. If you could
say uh Cynics, you can be in company with
without being insulted. Um So the the level of
the of provocation transgression uh exhortation to is much uh
lower. But there, there are some common points
. It's a, it's a stoic stoicism is an
ethic philosophy as cynicism uh virtue. The search for
virtue is key in uh stoicism. And uh there
is this idea that you, you cannot be controlled
by your feelings. Uh uh The cynics will say
that you cannot be controlled by your needs. Stoics
will say that you cannot be controlled by your feelings
, meaning you cannot be controlled by your, by
your pain or by your pleasure, which is a
common point with uh uh Cynics. Uh There is
another strong common point is it is a philosophy in
action. Stoics uh consider that the way you behave
is key in a philosophical point of view. Again
, it's not a theoretical philosophy. There is a
theoretical um corpus which is uh uh explaining uh analyzing
the, the idea of virtue, the relationship to
Phoenix, et cetera. But what is most important
is the way you uh you behave. And maybe
there is another element which is the relationship with nature
. For Stoics to understand the rules of nature is
key to uh choose your philosophical way of life.
You need to stay in contact with the rules of
uh nature. So, yes, there are,
there are lots of lots in common. But again
, Stoics must have been much easier to um comp
sti company must have been much easier and nicer than
Phoenix one, right? And, and by the
way, actually, I've asked you about stoicism specifically
because we've seen in recent years uh resurgence of spices
in popular culture actually. But uh do you look
at these recent resurgence uh as and as having anything
to do with the original sto Yeah, I don't
know if it's more stoicism or more cynicism, the
, the this uh the, the development of the
search of frugality, achy, um self sufficiency.
Um I, I think that some people will,
will, will uh claim to be influenced by the
model. Some will claim to be influenced by the
stoic uh model. I, I have never made
a kind of a full survey of the phenomenon.
You're right. I think it's an increasing trend movement
across the world of people who are trying to rethink
our relationship to progress. And cynics and Stoics are
of can be of great help to uh to rethink
the relationship to, to progress the idea that we
have to accumulate more and more to, to,
to produce uh more and more. Um some people
are trying to live a kind of decreasing uh life
in that uh perspective. And, and diogenes is
kind of uh the ultimate model of life in that
uh uh perspective. So, yes, there is
a kind of uh um uh increasing popularity of this
uh ancient philosophic uh movement, ancient philosophies in actions
uh that are more popular than they've been uh doing
. I would say a century ago, the popularity
of this movement was not the same in the,
in the population, not in the academic world,
but in the uh normal world, I would say
. So, one last question, then how do
you look basically at the legacy of diogenes? I
mean, how is he viewed today by philosophers in
general and in popular culture? Um I think there
is still some time um uh is still forgotten,
sometimes it was forgotten sometime in the ancient uh uh
time in antiquity. Uh Some histories of philosophy,
I mean, in the ancient times, uh uh
forgot to uh to study uh uh cynicism and it
still happens sometimes you have some very large book about
ancient philosophy. We don't uh even credit anything to
uh cynicism. So uh that is a kind of
very old uh tendency but uh things are, things
are changing. Uh I think in that, in
that matter. So that is a kind of uh
rehabilitation of the interest of uh cynicism because of his
genealogy with the Socratic philosophy and the stoic uh philosophy
that is a kind of rehabilitation. Uh and the
, the fact that we are facing this very modern
question of uh and the way the world is uh
going now and the economics, the industrial uh uh
issues we are, all of us are, are
, are facing. Uh it should, it should
give to uh cynicism a kind of new uh uh
new light on. Mhm Great. So uh the
book is again the Dangerous Life and ideas of diogenes
, the cynic. I'm leaving a link to it
in the description of this interview. And uh J
Manuel, just before we go apart from the book
, would you like to tell people where they can
find you on the internet? Uh What can you
mean if I have some kind of internet? Yeah
, like uh university page website, social media.
I, I have no social media page of any
kind. I don't have any Facebook page, Instagram
page, Twitter page uh or youtube channel. Uh
I just have a professional page uh where my uh
work is uh uh referred. Uh So uh when
I release a new uh a new study, a
new book, uh you, you can uh find
it uh there. Uh So that, that's it
. Basically, I'm afraid I'm not a, a
very electronic uh person. Uh And do you have
, for example, fuel uh uh few people profile
or Research Gate or something like that. Um I
, I'm sorry, I did not understand your question
because. Ok. Ok. So, uh thank
you so much again for coming on the show.
It's been a real pleasure to talk to you the
same. Thank you very much. Hi guys.
Thank you for watching this interview. Until the end
. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning and
development. Then differently check the website at N lights.com
and also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
paypal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and paypal supporters,
Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno Bernard Seche
O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting B are
no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Conners, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel Governor Mikel Stormer Samuel
Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her ma
J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel K Hes
Mark Smith J Tom Hummel s friends, David Sloan
Wilson Yaar, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter,
Romani Charlotte, Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt,
Pavlo Stassi na Me, Gary G Almansa Zal Ari
and YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broder
Douglas Fry Franka, La Gilon Cortez or Solis Scott
Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio
, Luke Loi. Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and
Peter Wo David Williams Di A Costa Anton Erickson Charles
Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier
, Bangalore Larry Dey Junior, Old Ebon, Starry
Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn.
Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick, Mark Temple
, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson
, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No week in the B
brand Nicholas Carlson Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis,
Valentine Steinman Perros, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert
Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular J Ner Urla
. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Shan
Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special
thanks to my producers is our web, Jim Frank
Luca Toni, Tom Ween, Bernard N Cortes Dixon
Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin John
Carl Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan
Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.